Preliminaries chapter (#6)
FLAGlab/bounded-const-generics-rust: document/chapters/preliminaries.tex

% !TEX root = ../main.tex
\chapter{Preliminaries}
\label{chapter:preliminaries}

> Rust is a systems programming language focused on speed, memory safety and concurrency. It intends to offer both performance similar to C++ and memory safety similar to Haskell. Rust is a compiled language having imperative and functional programming features. Its performance makes Rust an ideal candidate for writing operative systems, databases, compilers and other high-performance software without worrying about manual memory allocation. However, its safety and high-level abstractions has encouraged its usage in backend and even frontend development. 

Reviewer: Rust ```Add a reference to Rust (if its the URL to the webpage as a footnote, if it is a paper, as a references``` is a systems programming language focused on speed, memory safety and concurrency. It intends to offer both performance similar to C++ and memory safety similar to Haskell. Rust is a compiled language ```combining``` imperative and functional programming features. ~~Its~~```The focus on ``` performance makes Rust an ideal candidate for writing operative systems, databases, compilers```, (oxford comma)``` and other high-performance software without worrying about manual memory allocation. However, ~~its~~ ```Refer to the concrete Object``` ```Rust's```safety and high-level abstractions has encouraged its usage in backend and even frontend development.

Reviewer 2: Solved on https://github.com/FLAGlab/bounded-const-generics-rust/pull/6/commits/57518d1ac39622379e8318b8aab2f2ac24be5a9a

> Rust 1.0 was released on May, 2015 after 5 years of initial development lead by Graydon Hoare. During 2013, Hoare stepped down as technical lead on Rust and the language became endorsed by Mozilla. Currently, several companies have written in Rust part of their core applications as can be seen in \href{https://www.rust-lang.org/en-US/friends.html}{Rust Friends website}.

Reviewer: Rust 1.0 was released on May, 2015 after 5 years of initial development lead by Graydon Hoare. During 2013, Hoare stepped down as technical lead on Rust and the language became endorsed by Mozilla. 
``` There is a disconnect between these two ideas. I guess this is to show the maturity of the language, but the jump from a guy doesn't work there anymore to people use it is too big. You need a glue text sentence in between these two to actually talk about the maturity of the language to conclude that is at a stage where people use it.```
Currently, several companies have written in Rust part of their core applications as can be seen in ```suggestion\href{\url{https://www.rust-lang.org/en-US/friends.html}}```{Rust Friends website}.

Reviewer 2: I divided that paragraph in two: One about Rust's history (In fact one of the core team members sent me an ACM talk about it and I have cited it), and the other one about companies using Rust. I added an small part about the core team and semantic versioning (as the glue text).

What's the difference between `\href{\url{www.example.com}}{Example}` and `\href{www.example.com}{Example}`?

% !TEX root = ../main.tex
\chapter{Preliminaries}
\label{chapter:preliminaries}

> Rust is a systems programming language focused on speed, memory safety and concurrency. \footnote{\url{https://www.rust-lang.org/}}  It intends to offer both performance similar to C++ and memory safety similar to Haskell. Rust is a compiled language combining imperative and functional programming features. The focus on performance makes Rust an ideal candidate for writing operative systems, databases, compilers, and other high-performance software without worrying about manual memory allocation. However, Rust's safety and high-level abstractions has encouraged its usage in backend and even frontend development. 

Reviewer: Rust is a systems programming language focused on speed, memory safety and concurrency.\footnote{\url{https://www.rust-lang.org/}}  It intends to offer both performance similar to C++ and memory safety similar to Haskell. Rust is a compiled language combining imperative and functional programming features. The focus on performance makes Rust an ideal candidate for writing operative systems, databases, compilers, and other high-performance software without worrying about manual memory allocation. However, Rust's safety and high-level abstractions has encouraged its usage in backend and even frontend development.

> Rust started as a personal project of Graydon Hoare during 2006, who wanted to write a memory-safe, suited for concurrency and compiled language. After three years, Mozilla endorsed the project and Rust was announced to the public during 2010. Since then Rust's development has been completely open to the community. In 2013, Hoare stepped down as the technical leader of the project and a core team for the project was formally established. \cite{steve_acm} Version 1.0 was released in May, 2015, following a six weeks release cycle enforcing semantic versioning, the current version of the Rust compiler \footnote{This is version 1.31} is completely backwards compatible with 1.0.

Reviewer: Rust started as a personal project of Graydon Hoare during 2006, who wanted to write a memory-safe, suited for concurrency and compiled language. After three years, Mozilla endorsed the project and Rust was announced to the public during 2010. Since then Rust's development has been completely open to the community. In 2013, Hoare stepped down as the technical leader of the project and a core team for the project was formally established \cite{steve_acm}. Version 1.0 ```of the language``` was released in May, 2015, following a six weeks release cycle enforcing semantic versioning, the current version of the Rust compiler\footnote{```The current version``` is version 1.31} is completely backwards compatible with ``` version ```1.0.

Currently, several companies have written in Rust part of their core applications (including Mozilla, which is working on its next generation web engine: \href{https://servo.org/}{Servo}) as can be seen in \href{https://www.rust-lang.org/en-US/friends.html}{Rust Friends website}.

> In the remaining part of this section contains a quick tour of the Rust programming language main features. Readers more experienced with Rust can easily skip it.

Reviewer: In the remaining of this section contains a quick tour of the Rust programming language main features. Readers more experienced with Rust can skip this explanation.

\section{Mutability}

> Variable declarations are done using the \texttt{let} keyword. However, all variables are immutable by default as shown in \ref{lst:immutable}.

Reviewer: Variable declarations are done using the \texttt{let} keyword. However, all variables are immutable by default as shown in ``` You need to refer to the object here, saying something like Listing/Algorithms/Snippet \ref{lst:immutable}   I use fancyref to do this automatically, calling \fref{lst:immutable}```.
```suggestion
Create a dedicated environment for Rust listings (if not using one now). You can take the style from https://github.com/denki/listings-rust, and declare the environment with the appropriate code look-and-feel in the preamble, both for the listings and inline listings. I do it this way

% Rust listings
\lstdefinestyle{rust-stly}
 {language=Rust,
  showstringspaces=false,
  keywordstyle=\tt\bf,
  tabsize=3,
  style=floating,
  belowskip=-0.5 \baselineskip,
  aboveskip=-0.5 \baselineskip,
  morekeywords={}
}

%Rust environment    
\lstnewenvironment{rust}[1][]
 {\lstset{style=rust-stly,#1}}{}  
 
  % Rustin line source-code
  \lstnewenvironment{code}[1][]
 {\lstset{numbers=left,escapechar=`,caption=b,basicstyle=\small\ttfamily,#1}}{}
 
\newcommand{\scode}[1]{\textrm{\texttt{#1}}}
\def\srust{\lstinline[style=rust]}

This way you can write listings as \begin{rust} \end{rust} and inline code as \srust{} and it will all appear with the same style.
```

\begin{listing}[h]
	\begin{minted}{rust}
    fn main() {
        let x = 5;
        x += 1; // stderr: cannot assign twice to immutable variable `x`
        println!("{}", x);
    }
	\end{minted}
  \caption{Trying to modify an immutable value will result in a compilation error}
  \label{lst:immutable}
\end{listing}

> Mutability is allowed using the \texttt{mut} keyword as shown in \ref{lst:mutable}. The explicitness of mutability not only allows the compiler to do optimizations, it is also useful to the programmer, if a variable is not declared explicitly as mutable, its value will not change during its whole lifetime.

Reviewer: Mutability is allowed using the \texttt{mut} keyword as shown in ```Use any of these two options: Line 6 of \ref{}``` ```the declaration of variable \texttt{x} in \ref{lst:mutable}```. The explicitness of mutability not only allows the compiler to do optimizations, it is also useful to the programmer, if a variable is not declared explicitly as mutable, its value will not change during its whole lifetime.
```

\begin{listing}[h]
	\begin{minted}{rust}
    fn main() {
        let mut x = 5;
        x += 1;
        println!("{}", x); // stdout: 6 
    }
	\end{minted}
  \caption{Mutability is allowed but it must be explicit}
  \label{lst:mutable}
\end{listing}

\section{Memory management}

> In Rust, memory safety checks are done during compilation, avoiding the need for a garbage collector or manual memory management. The Rust compiler can reason about memory usage via three concepts: Ownership, borrowing and lifetimes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Rust, memory safety checks are done during compilation, avoiding the need for a garbage collector or manual memory management. The Rust compiler can reason about memory usage via three concepts: Ownership, borrowing, and lifetimes.
```

\subsection{Ownership}

> The semantics of value assignation in Rust differs from the traditional one. When assigning a value to a variable the state of the program change as usual, but the variable becomes the new \textit{owner} of such value. This means that the value will be dropped when its owner goes out of scope. Each value can only have a single owner at the same time. Meaning that for each value stored in memory there is exactly a single variable owning it. 

Reviewer: The semantics of value assignation in Rust differs from the traditional one```What is traditional in this context? I would use C/C++ as base comparison```. When assigning a value to a variable the state of the program changes as usual, but the variable becomes the new \textit{owner} of such value```Missing a reference to ownership. It could be the survey on ownership types by dave clarke (https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/Ownership-Types%3A-A-Survey-Clarke-Östlund/2ec97bd46ca1b3df1959573ff1684c6ec96cb74e)``` . This means that the value will be dropped when its owner goes out of scope. Each value can have only a single owner at the same time. This means that for each value stored in memory there is exactly a single variable owning it. 
```

> When a value is reassigned to another variable, ownership is transfered i.e, the former owner loses the ownership and it cannot be used again unless a new value is assigned to it. As a consequence, when a variable is used as a function argument, the variable loses ownership of its value, and the variable representing the argument of the function becomes the new owner. This behavior can be seen on \ref{lst:ownership}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a value is reassigned to another variable, ownership is transferred i.e., the former owner loses the ownership and it cannot be used again unless a new value is assigned to it. As a consequence, when a variable is used as a function argument, the variable loses ownership of its value, and the variable representing the argument of the function becomes the new owner. This behavior can be seen in \ref{lst:ownership}.
```

\begin{listing}[h]
	\begin{minted}{rust}
    fn exclamate(z: String) {
        println!("{}!", z);
    }

    fn main() {
        let x = String::from("Hello, world");

>         let mut y = x; // y` is the new owner, `x` is invalid.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        let mut y = x; // `y` is the new owner, `x` is invalid.
```

        exclamate(y); // `z`is the new owner, `y` is invalid.
        println!("{}", x); // stderr: use of moved value: `x`
        println!("{}", y); // stderr: use of moved value: `y`
    }
	\end{minted}
  \caption{Ownership transfer}
  \label{lst:ownership}
\end{listing}

> This ownership restriction has two advantages: First, is impossible to have a value stored in memory without a variable in the current scope assigned to it, avoiding some memory leaks. Second, is impossible to modify a single value from several different threads, avoiding data races. Nevertheless, ownership forces the programmer to write code akin to continuation-passing style, which is error-prone and difficult to read. The \textit{borrowing} concept (described in the next subsection) solves this issue.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ownership restriction has two advantages: First, it is impossible to have a value stored in memory without a variable in the current scope assigned to it, avoiding some memory leaks. Second, is impossible to modify a single value from several different threads, avoiding data races. Nevertheless, ownership forces the programmer to write code akin to continuation-passing style, which is error-prone and difficult to read. The \textit{borrowing} concept (described in the next subsection) solves this issue.
```

\subsection{Borrowing}

> Rust is a language with pointers or references. When a reference to a value is created, such value is being borrowed (but ownership is not transferred). There are two kind of references in Rust: immutable references denoted by \texttt{&T} and mutable references \texttt{&mut T}. Immutable references allow "read-only" access, independently of the referenced variable mutability. Mutable references allow "read and write" access, but they only reference mutable variables. Examples of both kinds of references can be found in \ref{lst:immutable_ref} and \ref{lst:mutable_ref}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Rust is a language with ~~pointers or references~~ Stick to 1 term. pass-by-reference semantics?. When a reference to a value is created, such value is being borrowed (but ownership is not transferred). There are two kind of references in Rust: immutable references denoted by \texttt{&T} and mutable references \texttt{&mut T}. Immutable references allow "read-only" access, independently of the referenced variable mutability. Mutable references allow "read and write" access, but they only reference mutable variables. Examples of both kinds of references can be found in \ref{lst:immutable_ref} and \ref{lst:mutable_ref} respectively.
```

\begin{listing}[h]
	\begin{minted}{rust}
    fn exclamate(z: &String) {
        println!("{}!", z);
    }

    fn main() {
        let x = String::from("Hello, world");
        exclamate(&x); // `z` is borrowing the value owned by `x`.
                       // stdout: Hello, world! 
        println!("{}", x); // stdout: Hello, world
    }
	\end{minted}
  \caption{References avoid the need for ownership transfer}
  \label{lst:immutable_ref}
\end{listing}

There are three rules about borrowing enforced by the compiler:
\begin{itemize}
    \item Several immutable references to a value can exist at a given time.
    \item There must be at most one mutable reference to a value at a given time.
    \item The first two scenarios are exclusive, only one of them can happen at the same time.
\end{itemize}

\begin{listing}[h]
	\begin{minted}{rust}
    fn exclamate_in_place(z: &mut String) {
        z += &"!";    
    }

    fn main() {
        let mut x = String::from("Hello, world");
        exclamate(&mut x); // `z`is borrowing the value owned by `x`.
        println!("{}", x); // stdout: Hello, world!
    }
	\end{minted}

>   \caption{Mutable references allow mutation of the bo(1, (2, (3, ())))rrowed value}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  \caption{Mutable references allow mutation of the borrowed value}
```

  \label{lst:mutable_ref}
\end{listing}

In other words, is possible to do just one of the following at the same time: Have several readers or, have a single writer. This prevents the mutation of shared state and, as a consequence, prevents data races in concurrent applications. There are certain scenarios where the borrowing rules are not flexible enough to allow certain kind of behaviors, such as locks for example, in those cases is possible to use types with internal mutability, the \texttt{Mutex} type is an example of this.

\subsection{Lifetimes}

> Adding references to a language makes possible to have dangling references. When a value is dropped, all its references become dangling references and they no longer point to a valid memory location. To solve this memory issue, Rust introduces the concept of lifetimes, each value has a lifetime which starts when the value is allocated and ends when the value is dropped. As a consequence, a value lifetime ends when its owner goes out of scope. Rust compiler has a "borrow checker", which compares scopes to check that no reference outlives the value being referenced. If this is not the case, a compilation error will occur.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Adding references to a language makes possible to have dangling references. When a value is dropped, all its references become dangling references, no longer pointing to a valid memory location. To solve this memory issue, Rust introduces the concept of lifetimes, each value has a lifetime which starts when the value is allocated and ends when the value is dropped. As a consequence, a value lifetime ends when its owner goes out of scope. The Rust compiler has a "borrow checker", which compares scopes to check that no reference outlives the value being referenced. If this is not the case, a compilation error occurs.
```

In principle, every reference needs a lifetime annotation. However, this is avoided by a process known as lifetime elision, where lifetimes are inferred automatically by the compiler. Even then, in certain cases the programmer might need to add such annotations. However, this will be discussed in the generics section.

\section{Algebraic data types}
\section{Control flow}
\section{Generics}

\section{Traits}

> Traits are Rust's mechanism to allow ad-hoc polymorphism, they allow to extend the behavior of a type requiring that the type implements a set of methods defined by the trait. The main difference between using traits instead of generic functions consist in the possibility to use concrete properties of an specific type when implementing the trait.

Reviewer: Traits are Rust's mechanism to allow ad-hoc polymorphism, they allow to extend the behavior of a type requiring that the type implements a set of methods defined by the trait. The main difference between using traits instead of generic functions consist in the possibility to use concrete properties of an specific type when implementing the trait ```add a reference to the traits paper (https://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1119479.1119483)```

        
        fn add(self, other: Rational) -> Rational {
            Rational {
                a: self.a * other.b + other.a * self.b,
                b: self.b * other.b
            }
        }
    }
    \end{minted}
  \caption{Implementation of a foreign trait for an user defined type}
  \label{lst:foreign_trait_impl}
\end{listing}

Traits can have associated types, such types can be used in the signature of the trait associated functions to allow more expressiveness, as an example, in \ref{lst:trait_foreign_impl}, \texttt{Output} is an associated type of \texttt{Add} and it can be used as the return type of the \texttt{add} method, allowing the addition of two variables of the same type, return a different type. It is also possible to parametrize traits using types and lifetimes, i.e., generic traits.

\begin{listing}[h]
	\begin{minted}{rust}
    use std::ops::Add;

    impl Add for bool { // stderr: only traits defined in the
                        // current crate can be implemented 
                        // for arbitrary types.
        type Output = bool;
        
        fn add(self, other: bool) -> bool {
            self || other
        }
    }
    \end{minted}

>   \caption{Trying to implement a foreign trait for a foreign type will result in a compilation error}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  \caption{Implementation a foreign trait for a foreign type results in a compilation error}
```

  \label{lst:foreign_trait_foreign_impl}
\end{listing}

Traits are used for operator overloading, e.g., the types that can be operated with \texttt{+} must implement the \texttt{Add} trait of the standard library, \ref{lst:foreign_trait_impl} is an example of this. 

Thread safety is also handled using traits. Types which are thread-safe to send must implement the \texttt{Send} trait and types which are thread-safe to share (using references) must implement the \texttt{Sync} trait. Both traits are empty , i.e., they do not request any function to be implemented, but are unsafe traits because the compiler can not guarantee the safety of sending or sharing values of a certain type.

\section{Error handling}

> Is common to use exceptions in imperative languages to represent errors. However, having functional influence, Rust has two kind of errors: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Is common to use exceptions in imperative languages to represent errors. However, having a functional influence, Rust has two kind of errors: 
```

\begin{itemize}
    \item Recoverable errors, where the program execution is not interrupted and is possible to handle the error.
    \item Unrecoverable errors, where the program execution stops and memory is cleaned.
\end{itemize}

> Recoverable errors are written by returning a variable of type \texttt{Result<T, E>}, which is an enumeration with two variants: the \texttt{Ok<T>} variant,containing the result of a successful operation, and the \texttt{Err<E>} variant, containing the failure reason of a failed operation. If a function returns a value of type \texttt{Result<T, E>} the programmer must explicitly handle both variants, making error handling explicit all the time. Error propagation can be done using the \texttt{?} operator, which does an early return if the expression returns an \texttt{Err<E>}. An example of this can be seen on \ref{lst:recoverable_error}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Recoverable errors are written by returning a variable of type \texttt{Result<T, E>}, which is an enumeration with two variants: the \texttt{Ok<T>} variant,containing the result of a successful operation, and the \texttt{Err<E>} variant, containing the failure reason of a failed operation. If a function returns a value of type \texttt{Result<T, E>} the programmer must explicitly handle both variants, making error handling explicit all the time. Error propagation can be done using the \texttt{?} operator, which does an early return if the expression returns an \texttt{Err<E>}. An example of this can be seen on \ref{lst:recoverable_error}.
```

\begin{listing}[h]
	\begin{minted}{rust}
    use std::io;
    use std::io::Read;
    use std::fs::File;

    fn read_file_to_string(path: &str) -> Result<String, io::Error> {
        let mut string = String::new();
        // if opening the file fails, the error is returned
        let mut file = File::open(path)?;
        // if reading the file fails, the error is returned
        file.read_to_string(&mut string)?;
        // if nothing fails, the string is returned
        Ok(string)
    }
    \end{minted}
  \caption{A function returning a recoverable error, doing error propagation}
  \label{lst:recoverable_error}
\end{listing}

> Unrecoverable errors are written using the macro \texttt{panic!}, having as argument a string the panic reason. Unrecoverable errors are reserved for cases when execution would cause undefined behavior or when it does not make sense to keep executing the program after the error was reached. Because of this, unrecoverable errors are most commonly used in code handling memory or other low-level operations, such as vector insertion, \footnote{\url{https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/vec/struct.Vec.html\#method.push}} or when the logic of the application dictates the application must crash, as seen in \ref{lst:unrecoverable_error}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unrecoverable errors are written using the macro \texttt{panic!}, having as argument a string; the panic reason. Unrecoverable errors are reserved for cases when execution would cause undefined behavior or when it does not make sense to keep executing the program after the error was reached. Because of this, unrecoverable errors are most commonly used in code handling memory or other low-level operations, such as vector insertion,\footnote{\url{https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/vec/struct.Vec.html\#method.push}} or when the logic of the application dictates the application must crash, as seen in \ref{lst:unrecoverable_error}.
```

\begin{listing}[h]
	\begin{minted}{rust}
    fn main() {
        match read_file_to_string("./config") {
            Ok(string) => { ... }
            Err(_) => panic!("Cannot run without a config file!")
        }
    }
    \end{minted}
  \caption{A function panicking after a critical error}
  \label{lst:unrecoverable_error}
\end{listing}

\section{Macros}

> Macros are the Rust mechanism to allow metaprogramming. Rust's capabilities on this matter are limited, but macros are widely used given the static nature of the language. Currently Rust have two kind of macros: procedural and declarative, only declarative macros will be discussed here.

Reviewer: Macros are ```the mechanism used in Rust ```to allow metaprogramming. Rust's capabilities on this matter are limited, but macros are widely used given the static nature of the language. Currently Rust has two kind of macros: procedural and declarative, only declarative macros will be discussed here ```Why?```.

Declarative macros, which are called using the syntax \texttt{macro\_name!}, allow to manipulate Rust code in a pattern matched way. These macros are declared using the macro \texttt{macro\_rules!}, which take the name of the macro and a series of code patterns like a \texttt{match} statement. 

Most of the time, declarative macros are used as a replacement for functions with several arguments, given that Rust only admits functions with a fixed number of arguments. For example, \texttt{vec!} and \texttt{println!} are macros because they may receive a variable number of elements: \texttt{vec!(1)},  \texttt{vec!(1, 2)},  \texttt{vec!(1,2,3)} and so on.

\begin{listing}[h]
	\begin{minted}{rust}
macro_rules! list {
    ($head:tt $(, $tail:tt)*) => {($head, tuplify!($($tail),*))};
    () => {()};
}

fn main() {
    println!("{:?}", list!(1,2,3)); // stdout: (1, (2, (3, ())))
}
    \end{minted}

>   \caption{A terrible list implementation using Rust's macros and tuples}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  \caption{A list implementation using Rust's macros and tuples}
```

  \label{lst:unrecoverable_error}
\end{listing}
\section{Intermediate representations}

> Rust code is not compiled directly into machine code, instead is compiled into a series of intermediate representations. On early versions, Rust code suffered a desugaring process (this representation is known as the high-level intermediate representation or HIR) before being compiled into the LLVM intermediate representation and finally it was compiled to machine code. \footnote{\url{https://rust-lang-nursery.github.io/rustc-guide/codegen.html}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Rust code is not compiled directly into machine code, instead is compiled into a series of intermediate representations. On early versions, Rust code suffered a desugaring process (this representation is known as the high-level intermediate representation or HIR) before being compiled into the LLVM intermediate representation, and finally it compiled to machine code.\footnote{\url{https://rust-lang-nursery.github.io/rustc-guide/codegen.html}}
```
